Title: Gappy Reconstruction of Bubbly Flows by Guided Diffusion Models

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.29843v1

Published Time: Tue, 30 Jun 2026 02:06:22 GMT

Number of Pages: 17

Markdown Content:
# Gappy Reconstruction of Bubbly Flows by Guided Diffusion Models 

Hridey Narula, 1, ∗ Tianyi Li, 2 Michele Buzzicotti, 2 Luca Biferale, 2 and Prasad Perlekar 1, †

> 1

Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Gopanpally, Hyderabad 500046, India 

> 2

Department of Physics and INFN, University of Rome “Tor Vergata”, Via della Ricerca Scientifica 1, Rome, 00133, Italy 

(Dated: June 30, 2026) Experiments in multiphase flows are often limited in their ability to simultaneously obtain ve-locity measurements in different phases. At the same time, flow reconstruction from phase-limited measurements is a challenging problem due to the substantially different velocity statistics across the phases. We address this problem for buoyancy-driven bubbly flows in the pseudo-turbulence regime by using a guided diffusion model. We train the model using two-dimensional slices of the velocity field extracted from fully resolved three-dimensional direct numerical simulations. The model generates physically realistic velocity fields both unconditionally and when conditioned on the surrounding liquid flow. The reconstructed bubble-phase velocity field accurately reproduces key statistical features of the flow. We further show that a simple patching procedure for adjacent two-dimensional slices enables a reasonable reconstruction of the three-dimensional flow inside a bubble. These results establish the potential of diffusion models to serve as generative priors for three-dimensional turbulent multiphase flows, opening a route toward the reconstruction of unobserved or experimentally inaccessible velocity fields from sparse, partial, or phase-limited measurements. 

I. INTRODUCTION 

Flows generated by rising columns of bubbles are en-countered in a wide range of natural and industrial set-tings [1, 2]. At moderate gas volume fractions (0 .5–10%), bubbles are homogeneously distributed, and wakes asso-ciated with individual bubbles interact and superimpose, giving rise to complex multiscale flow structures com-monly referred to as pseudo-turbulence (PT) or bubble-induced agitation [3–5]. Although the flow generated by a single bubble strongly depends on the density and viscosity contrast between the bubble and liquid phases [1, 6–8], the collective dynamics of a large number of bub-bles appears to have some universal properties [3, 9–21]. These studies suggest that the complex interplay of iner-tia, surface tension, and viscous dissipation leads to PT, which is characterized by the Galilei number (Ga)–the ratio of buoyancy to viscous forces. Similar to canonical turbulence, a statistical approach is used to understand the nature of velocity fluctuations and energy transfers in bubbly flows. At moderate Galilei numbers (Ga ≲ 1000), the energy E(k) contained in the wavenumber k has been shown to obey the scaling k−3 [3, 4, 10, 13, 22–24]. More recently, studies have shown the emergence of the Kol-mogorov scaling k−5/3 at sufficiently large Galilei num-bers (Ga ≳ 1000) [16, 19]. In spite of recent advances, the multiphase and mul-tiscale nature of the bubbly flow makes their numerical and experimental investigations extremely challenging. Accurate fully resolved direct numerical simulations are often limited to tens or hundreds of bubbles, and are computationally prohibitive [13, 14, 16, 25]. Similarly,   

> ∗hrideynarula@tifrh.res.in
> †perlekar@tifrh.res.in

experiments typically can only monitor liquid velocity fluctuations using probes such as a hot-wire [26, 27] or Lagrangian particle tracking measurements [28, 29]. Al-though machine learning assisted flow visualization tech-niques have been employed for precise tracking of indi-vidual bubbles in a swarm [30–38], resolving the flow dy-namics inside the bubbles remains difficult. Attempts to use AI/ML techniques for flow generation trained on high-resolution numerical data for flow gen-eration are mostly restricted to studies of either iso-lated bubbles or small Galilei number flows. Zhai et al. 

[39] have previously employed training data obtained from two-dimensional (2 d) simulations of pressure-driven channel flows with up to 60 bubbles at small Reynolds numbers ( ≲ .01), to show that physics informed neural networks (PINNs) can successfully predict flow fields. However, for flows with even moderately large Galilei numbers, flow reconstruction remains challenging be-cause not only does the flow resemble canonical turbu-lence, but also the velocity statistics in the liquid and bubble phases are substantially different [13, 14, 40–42]. Recently, generative diffusion models have shown promis-ing results in predicting various statistical properties of single-phase three-dimensional turbulence such as gener-ation of synthetic Lagrangian trajectories of tracers [43] and inertial particles [44], flow reconstruction of 3 d ro-tating turbulence [45], and reconstruction from sparse measurements [46]. In the present work, we have developed a generative diffu-sion model to unconditionally generate two-dimensional slices of three-dimensional buoyancy-driven bubbly flows, and subsequently reconstruct the flow inside the bubbles conditioned on the ambient liquid flow information for a moderately large Galilei number (Ga = 600). The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: in Section II, we first introduce the governing Navier–Stokes equations for two-phase flows and describe the numerical 

> arXiv:2606.29843v1 [physics.flu-dyn] 29 Jun 2026

2methodologies employed to generate the training dataset for bubbly flows. Subsequently, in Section III, we present a concise overview of the theoretical framework underly-ing the diffusion model. Finally, in Section IV, we report the main results concerning the two-dimensional recon-struction of the flow within bubbles at a moderate Galilei number Ga = 600.   

> II. DATASET DETAILS A. Numerical Methods

We model the dynamics of bubbly flows in a tri-periodic cubic domain of volume V using the one-fluid formulation [47, 48]. The incompressible Navier-Stokes equations for the hydrodynamic velocity field u in the two phases are: 

ρ(ϕ)Dtu = −∇P + μ∇2u + F g + F σ , (1a) 

Dtϕ = 0 , and ∇ · u = 0 . (1b) Here, Dt = ∂t +u·∇ is the material derivative, ϕ is an in-dicator function that is 0(1) in the liquid (bubble) phase, the density field ρ(ϕ) = ρLϕ + ρB (1 − ϕ), ρL and ρB are the density of the liquid and bubble phase respectively, P

is the pressure, μ is the dynamic viscosity assumed to be the same in two phases, F g = ( ρ − ρa)gˆz is the buoyancy force with ρa ≡ 1/V R ρ dx, and the surface tension force 

F σ = σκ n, where σ is the surface tension coefficient, κ is the local interface curvature, and n is the normal vector to the interface. In previous studies, we have shown that several statisti-cal properties of the flow are insensitive to the value of the Atwood number, At ≡ (ρL − ρB )/(ρL + ρB ) [13, 16, 49]. Consequently, for simplicity, we use At = 0 .04 and in-voke the Boussinesq approximation wherein density vari-ations are neglected on the left-hand side of Eq. (1) (ρ(ϕ) ≈ ρL), while the buoyancy forcing term reduces to F g ≈ (ρB − ρL) ϕ g ˆz [49].  

> B. Direct Numerical Simulations (DNS)

We perform DNS of Eq. (1) on a triply periodic cubic domain with side length L = 2 π discretized with N 3 =512 3 equispaced collocation points. The velocity field is evolved using a pseudo-spectral method [50], while the indicator function is evolved with a front-tracking algo-rithm [51, 52]. Time integration employs a second-order Adams–Bashforth scheme. The details of the numerical implementation and the comparison with the bubbly flow experiments [10, 41, 42] are discussed in Pandey et al. 

[13, 49]. The simulation domain is initialized with 12 ran-domly placed spherical bubbles of equal diameter D with the gas volume fraction 1 /V R ϕ dx = 3 .2%. The other parameters are chosen so that the dimensionless Galilei number Ga ≡ pρL(ρL − ρB )gD 3/μ ≈ 600 and the Bond                                                          

> Run T /τ ηδt/τ η#Snapshots #Samples Used for
> R1 273 2.25 122 10,630 Training
> R2 160 2.25 72 6,314 Training
> R3 167 2.25 75 6,407 Testing TABLE I. Parameters used in our DNS. All the runs have identical Ga ≈600 and Bo ≈1.75, but correspond to dif-ferent initial bubble positions. The Kolmogorov timescale is
> τη=pν/ε , where νis the liquid kinematic viscosity and εis the energy dissipation rate. All simulations are with 512 3col-location points, with η/ ∆x≈1.59 where ηis the Kolmogorov lengthscale, η= ( ν3/ε )1/4and ∆ xis the grid spacing in real space. Tis the total duration of the statistically steady state and δt is the interval between successive snapshots. # of Sam-ples are the total two-dimensional samples obtained from the saved three-dimensional snapshots.
> FIG. 1. Contour plot of the z-component of the vorticity,
> ωz= ( ∇ × u)·ˆz, with contour levels ωz=±3⟨ω2
> z⟩1/2, super-imposed on the bubble interfaces (grey contours of ϕ= 1 /2).

number Bo = ( ρL − ρB )gD 3/σ ≈ 1.75 are comparable to the typical experimental values [3, 4, 10, 19]. We perform DNS with these parameters to generate three indepen-dent flow realizations, each initialized with different ini-tial bubble positions. Table I summarizes the parameters used in our simulations. A representative instantaneous realization of the bubbly flow, shown in Fig. 1, illustrates the intricate spatio-temporal flow structures arising from bubble wakes and their interactions. The evolution of the average kinetic energy KE = 1 /V R (ρu2)/2d x, is shown in Fig. 2a. A statistically stationary regime is achieved for t > 100 τη , where τη ≡ pν/ε is the Kol-mogorov time scale and ε is the energy dissipation rate. Fig. 2b displays the corresponding steady-state energy spectrum defined as: 

E(k) = 12

X

> k−1/2≤κ≤k+1 /2

|bu(κ)|2,3          

> FIG. 2. (a) Time evolution of the kinetic energy for three different initial bubble configurations. The initial transient phase is shown with dashed lines, while solid lines denote the statistically stationary regime ( t > 100 τη). (b) Steady-state energy spectrum E(k) versus k/K D, where KD= 2 π/D . The dashed and dash-dotted lines correspond to the Kolmogorov (k−5/3) and pseudo-turbulence ( k−3) scalings, respectively.

with bu denoting the Fourier transform of the veloc-ity field. Energy injection occurs primarily near the wavenumber k ≈ kD , where kD = 2 π/D . We also indi-cate the Kolmogorov scaling range k−5/3 for kD < k < k η

[19, 49], as well as the pseudo-turbulent scaling range k−3

for k > k η [3, 4, 10, 13, 14].   

> III. DIFFUSION MODELS FOR FLOW GENERATION AND RECONSTRUCTION A. Unconditional Generative Model

We briefly summarize the diffusion-model framework used in this work. Diffusion models are a class of gener-ative probabilistic models that learn a high-dimensional data distribution through a prescribed forward noising process and a learned reverse (backward) denoising pro-cess [53, 54]. Let X0 denote a representative sample from the training dataset, details about the dataset are provided in Section IV A. The objective of the diffusion model is to learn a generative distribution pθ (X0) that approximates the underlying training-data (target) dis-tribution q(X0), where θ denotes the neural network pa-rameters. Once trained, new samples can be generated starting from white Gaussian noise and iteratively apply-ing the learned reverse process. In the forward process, the clean flow configuration X0

is gradually transformed into a sequence of noisy states 

X1, . . . , XT through a Gaussian Markov chain (note that 

t here is the discrete noising step), 

q(Xt|Xt−1) = N

p 1 − βt Xt−1, β tI



, (2) where βt is the prescribed noise variance at diffusion step 

t. Defining αt = 1 − βt and ¯ αt = Qts=1 αs, one obtains the closed-form expression 

q(Xt|X0) = N  √¯αt X0, (1 − ¯αt)I , (3) or equivalently 

Xt = √¯αt X0 + √1 − ¯αt ϵ, ϵ ∼ N (0, I). (4) For sufficiently large T , XT is approximately distributed according to a standard Gaussian distribution. The backward process approximates the inverse of the forward noising process by denoising from Xt to Xt−1

at each diffusion step. It models the reverse transition probability as 

pθ (Xt−1|Xt) = N (μθ (Xt, t ), Σt) , (5) where μθ is the learned reverse mean. Following the stan-dard DDPM (Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Model) formulation [54], we fix the reverse variance according to the prescribed noise schedule, Σt = βtI. Instead of di-rectly predicting μθ , a neural network is trained to pre-dict the noise component ϵθ (Xt, t ) in Eq. (4). The cor-responding estimate of the clean sample (denoted using a hat) is ˆX0(Xt, t ) = Xt − √1 − ¯αt ϵθ (Xt, t )

√¯αt

. (6) The reverse mean is then written in terms of the pre-dicted noise as [54] 

μθ (Xt, t ) = 1

√αt



Xt − βt

√1 − ¯αt

ϵθ (Xt, t )



. (7) Starting from XT ∼ N (0, I), repeated application of Eq. (5) generates a sample from the learned distribution 

pθ (X0). The model is trained using the standard DDPM noise-prediction objective, which corresponds to a simplified variational bound on the expected data log-likelihood 

Eq(X0)[log pθ (X0)] [54]. At each training iteration, abatch of clean samples X0 is drawn from the training dataset; for each data sample, a diffusion step t and a noise realization ϵ are sampled, and the corresponding noisy sample Xt is constructed using Eq. (4). The model parameters are optimized by minimizing 

L = EX0,t, ϵ

h

∥ϵ − ϵθ (Xt, t )∥2i

, (8) where ϵ ∼ N (0, I) is the noise used to generate Xt. The loss curves shown below report the mini-batch value of (8) during training. Additional implementation details, including the neural-network architecture, diffusion noise schedule, and training setup, are provided in the supple-mentary material [55] ; in particular, we use a physically motivated noise schedule to better preserve small-scale fidelity in the generated flow fields.  

> B. Training-Free Conditional Generation

The unconditional diffusion model has learned the prior distribution pθ (X0) over the clean training dataset. 4We can generate (unconditional) new samples from this distribution using eq. (5). However, for guided genera-tion we want to generate a new sample conditioned on the given information in the measurement region M. There-fore, we want the posterior distribution pθ (X0|XM)where XM is the measured portion of the full image. In the present work we use a training-free guidance scheme [56], so that we can use the same learned prior dis-tribution to generated samples conditioned on the mea-surement region. This is achieved by using diffusion pos-terior sampling (DPS) [57] which has been previously shown to be effective in a variety of chaotic systems [46, 58, 59]. In this approach, the reverse process (Eq. (5)) is modified to include a guidance force in the mea-sured region, 

Xt−1 = μθ (Xt, t ) + pβtZ − ζt∇Xt ∥XM − ˆX0∥2

> M

, (9) where Z ∼ N (0 , 1), ˆX0 is the clean image predicted by the model (using the noisy image Xt at step t, see Eq.(6)) and the norm is calculated only in the measure-ment region M. The coefficient ζt ≡ ζ/ ∥XM − ˆX0∥

where the guidance strength (GS) ζ is a hyperparame-ter of the model [57]. In the next section, we use this guided diffusion model framework for reconstruction of the bubble-phase velocity field.  

> IV. FLOW RECONSTRUCTION INSIDE THE BUBBLE PHASE

We now use the diffusion model architecture described in the previous section for reconstruction of velocity fields inside the bubble, provided the liquid-phase velocity field is known. Although the gas volume fraction is relatively low (approximately 3 .2%), flow reconstruction inside the bubble remains highly challenging, since the velocity field is inhomogeneous and the statistical properties in the bubble and liquid phase differ substantially [13, 26, 42]. Experimental investigations typically produce mea-surements of two-dimensional (2 d) flow slices [29] or one-dimensional (1 d) time series [3, 10]. Consequently, in the present study we apply diffusion models to re-construct the velocity field in the bubble phase, using two-dimensional (2 d) flow configurations extracted from the DNS data (Table I). In section IV B, we demon-strate that, for a prescribed bubble shape, the three-dimensional flow structures inside the bubble can be re-covered by assembling the reconstructed 2 d flow fields. We have also used diffusion models for the simpler prob-lem of reconstruction of Eulerian (one-dimensional) time signals, details are provided in the supplementary mate-rial to this paper [55].   

> A. Two-dimensional Reconstruction of Flow Inside Bubble
> 1. Data acquisition

The two-dimensional (2 d) training and testing datasets are constructed from the 3 d steady-state realizations of the bubbly flows (runs R1-R3 ). Each dataset is composed of 2 d slices ( xz and yz planes aligned with the gravity di-rection) of the flow field, and every slice contains at least one bubble. To avoid strong correlations, we enforce a minimum separation of 10 grid points between any two consecutive slices taken from the same 3 d snapshot. The 3d snapshots are separated by at least 2 .25 τη . Further-more, we apply random spatial shifts to individual slices and shuffle them to destroy any residual spatio-temporal correlations. For computational feasibility, the chosen planes are subsequently coarse-grained from 512 2 to 256 2

grid points using a sharp spectral filter. We arrange the data in four channels, X =(uh, u z , u p, ϕ ), where uh and uz are the horizontal and vertical (in-plane) velocity components, respectively, and 

up is the out-of-plane velocity component. To ensure that all four channels have comparable variance, we rescale the velocity field so that u ∈ [−1, 1] and the indicator field 

ϕ ∈ [−1/4, 1/4] [46].  

> 2. Model training and reconstruction

The training set comprises a total of 16944 slices (runs 

R1 –R2 ). We train the model on eight NVIDIA A100 GPUs for about 96 hours with a batch size of four per GPU. Each epoch is defined as 16944 /32 ≈ 529 iterations and the model is trained for 925 epochs. The plot of the loss function L with respect to the number of epochs in Fig. 3a indicates that the training process reaches conver-gence at approximately 100 epochs. To further substan-tiate this observation, we present pseudo-color visualiza-tions of the vertical component of the velocity field uz

obtained from a model trained for 661 epochs (Fig. 3b) and from the same model trained for 925 epochs (Fig. 3c). The resulting velocity fields are nearly indistinguishable, supporting the conclusion that the training procedure has converged. In all subsequent analysis, we use the model trained for 925 epochs (4 .9 × 10 5 iterations). A repre-sentative visualization of the velocity field uz and the indicator function ϕ during various stages of generation (denoising) using our diffusion model is shown in Fig. 4. Diffusion models, similar to other deep learning ar-chitectures, are prone to memorizing their training sam-ples [60]. To assess the degree of memorization, we con-sider the cosine similarity between two fields, say A and 

B, defined as cos(Θ) = ⟨AB ⟩/p⟨A2⟩⟨ B2⟩, where the an-gular brackets denote spatial averaging. We generate 10 3

unconditioned flow realizations from the model and for each generated sample determine the closest counterpart in the training set. This is done by minimizing the mean 5        

> FIG. 3. (a) Loss function Lplotted as a function of the num-ber of epochs. The dot and dash-dot lines indicate epoch number 661 and 925 respectively. Inset: (b,c) Pseudo-color plot of the vertical component of the velocity uzobtained from model for training after 661 (b) and 925(c) epochs re-spectively. The red lines denote the location of the bubble interface.

squared difference between the generated realization and the training data for the bubble indicator function ϕ. In Fig. 5a, we plot the probability density function (pdf) of cosine similarity P (cos(Θ)) between (i) uz obtained from the testing data and its training counterpart, and (ii) uz

generated from the model and its training counterpart. These distributions are nearly identical, indicating that the velocity field generated by the diffusion model is sta-tistically as similar to the DNS data as is an independent DNS run of the flow with the same parameters. We thus conclude that any potential memorization effects are not significant in the present analysis. Next, we present a comparison of various velocity statistics computed from 3200 slices of both the test dataset (ground truth, run R3 ) and the generated dataset. In Fig. 5b, we show the energy spectrum E(k) (obtained by shell-averaging the two-dimensional spectrum of the in-plane velocity field ( uh, u z )) versus k, while Fig. 5c,d shows the pdf of uz in the bubble and liquid phases. In all cases, the agreement between the ground truth and the generated data is excellent, indicating that the model faithfully captures the underlying velocity field statistics in both phases.  

> 3. Flow Reconstruction Inside Bubbles

We now address the following experimentally relevant question: given knowledge of the bubble configuration and the velocity field in the liquid phase, can we re-construct the flow inside the bubble? To this end, we           

> FIG. 4. Pseudo-color plot of the vertical velocity field uz
> (left) and the gray-scale plot of the indicator function ϕ(right) evaluated at various stages of the denoising process during sample generation. Top panel: Red (blue) indicates regions of large positive (negative) velocity. Bottom panel: Black (white) denotes the bubble phase ϕ > 1/2 (liquid phase ϕ <
> 1/2). The model starts by considering a pure Gaussian noise at step 1 and incrementally denoises it following the backward sample process (Eq. (5)).

employ the training-free guidance method known as dif-fusion posterior sampling (DPS) [57], which was briefly discussed in section III B. We remind the reader that DPS enables us to reuse the same diffusion model to generate samples conditioned on information available within a specified measurement region M. The strength of the bias is governed by the guidance hyperparameter ζ (see Eq. (9)). In the following, we use the test data set R3 as 6         

> FIG. 5. (a) Plot showing excellent agreement between the pdf of the cosine similarity P(cos(Θ)) obtained from (i) the testing data and the closest training data, and (ii) the gen-erated data and the closest training data. (b) The energy spectrum E(k) versus k, (c,d) Pdf of the vertical velocity uz
> in the bubble phase (c) and the liquid phase (d). In (b-d) we use 3200 slices for both the training dataset (ground truth) and the free (unconstrained) generation.
> FIG. 6. Normalized mean square error for different com-ponents of velocity: horizontal ( uh), vertical ( uz) and out of plane ( up) between the ground truth and reconstructed sam-ples with varying guidance strength. The comparison is done over 300 slices. We take the optimal guidance strength to be 800 which is the minima for MSE in bubble phase.

the ground truth and the liquid phase ( ϕ ≤ 1/2) as the measurement region M.The optimal guidance strength ζopt is identified as fol-lows: we select NR = 300 slices from the test dataset 

R3 [61], and for each slice we reconstruct the flow inside the bubbles for ten different values of ζ ∈ [32 , 2048]. The normalized mean square difference between the ground truth (DNS flow fields) and the reconstructed fields in the bubble phase M bi and the liquid phase M li is defined as: 

M b,l i (ζ) = 1

NRNRX

> r=1

R d2xϕ b,l r (ur,i − uRE  

> r,i

[ζ]) 2

R d2xϕ b,l r u2

> r,i

, (10) where ϕb = ϕ, ϕl = 1 −ϕ, and uRE  

> i

[ζ] represent the recon-structed velocity field with guidance strength ζ. Fig. 6 displays the mean square error Mi as a function of ζ

for all three components of the velocity in both phases. Although the minima occur at the same value of the guidance strength for the different velocity components within a phase, the vertical component exhibits a smaller mean square error. This is due to the presence of coher-ent flow structures in the vertical velocity. In addition, since the guidance in Eq. (9) is applied exclusively in the liquid phase, we have M l ≪ M b. Therefore, we choose the optimal guidance strength ζopt = 800 as the value which minimizes the mean square error in the bubble phase. We now apply the diffusion model to reconstruct the flow inside the bubble phase, given the liquid-phase ve-locity field and the bubble positions. The plot in Fig. 7 shows a representative snapshot of the vertical velocity uz

and its reconstruction using (9). As a baseline, we addi-tionally use the griddata interpolation routine from the SciPy library [62] to estimate the flow inside the bubbles (see supplementary material [55] for further details). It is evident that the reconstructed velocity field outperforms the naive interpolation approach in capturing the flow structures. We stress that the reconstruction procedure is inher-ently statistical. Using ζ = ζopt together with the same liquid-phase velocity field and bubble arrangement, we obtain multiple realizations of the reconstructed verti-cal velocity. In Fig. 8, we show the corresponding one-dimensional cuts of the vertical velocity for the four bub-ble configurations displayed in Fig. 7. These plots clearly demonstrate that a typical reconstruction reproduces the velocity profile far more accurately than interpolation, which either over-predicts uz along the vertical cuts or introduces spurious high-frequency spatial oscillations in the horizontal direction. We now investigate how accurately the diffusion model reproduces the statistical characteristics of velocity fluc-tuations in the bubble phase. In Fig. 9, we present the pdfs of the horizontal and vertical velocity components (and their derivatives) in the bubble phase for the test dataset (ground truth), the reconstruction, and the inter-polation. The pdfs derived from the reconstructed flow are in close agreement with the corresponding ground truth distributions. In contrast, in most cases the inter-polation scheme consistently fails to represent both the core and the tails of the pdfs correctly. To assess whether the reconstructed flow fields cor-rectly reproduce the bubble–liquid correlations, we also 7

FIG. 7. A sample 2 d slice of the vertical velocity field uz (leftmost column): ground truth (top row), reconstruction using the diffusion model (middle row) and filling using interpolation (bottom row). On right are the zoomed in plots of the velocity field around each bubble. The red lines demarcate bubble-liquid interface. 

FIG. 8. One-dimensional cuts of uz through the center of bubble along the vertical (top) and horizontal (bottom) directions for various reconstructions of the four bubbles in Fig. 7. Interpolation is 2 d cubic order interpolation using scipy’s griddata functionality. The shaded region indicates the location of the bubbles. The bubble centers are ( xc, z c), and D is the bubble diameter. 8

FIG. 9. Pdf of horizontal velocity (a) and its derivatives (b, c) and pdf of vertical velocity (d) and its derivatives (e, f) for the ground truth, reconstruction and interpolation inside the bubble phase. All the pdfs are standardized by the variance of the ground truth data. 

FIG. 10. Pdfs of the transverse and longitudinal velocity increments δT,L r uz for r = D/ 3 (a,d), the corresponding transverse and longitudinal second-order structure functions (b,e), and the associated flatness (c,f). Only increments taken across the bubble–liquid interface are included. 9evaluate the distribution of vertical velocity increments taken across the interface. Specifically, we define hori-zontal (transverse) increments as δTr uz = uz (h + r, z ) −

uz (h, z ) and vertical (longitudinal) increments as δLr uz =

uz (h, z + r) − uz (h, z ), where h and z denote the horizon-tal and vertical coordinates, respectively, and we only consider increments that traverse the bubble–liquid in-terface. The panels in Fig. 10 display velocity increment pdfs at r ≈ D/ 3, the second-order structure functions SL,T  

> 2

=

⟨(δL,T r uz )2⟩, and the flatness F = S4/S 22 for the recon-structed fields, which are indistinguishable from the cor-responding statistics of the ground truth. In contrast, the interpolation scheme not only fails to reproduce the core of the distribution, but also overestimates intermit-tency at intermediate scales while underestimating it at small scales. With this, we complete our discussion of the two-dimensional reconstruction of the flow inside the bubble given the liquid velocity fields. In the next section, we show that the same model trained on the 2 d data set can also be used to reconstruct the 3 d flow reasonably well.  

> B. Three-dimensional ( 3d) flow reconstruction inside bubbles

Although the model is trained to reconstruct flow only in two-dimensional slices, we demonstrate below that stacking neighboring slices yields a plausible three-dimensional reconstruction of the flow within the bubble phase. We select a single realization from run R3 and coarse-grain it onto a 256 3 grid using a sharp-spectral fil-ter, following the same procedure employed to train the diffusion model. For the test (ground-truth) dataset, we extract a sub-volume of size 256 × 71 × 256 grid points, chosen such that at least one bubble lies fully within the domain. Flow visualizations for a few representative slices in this sub-volume for the ground truth are shown in Fig. 11a. Because the diffusion model is trained to reconstruct the flow within the bubble in the xz -plane,      

> FIG. 11. Visualization of few representative slices selected for the 3 dreconstruction for the ground truth (a) and reconstruc-tion (b). We have averaged the reconstructed flow fields over 60 possible reconstructions for each slice, obtained by using different noise seeds. Note that the horizontal direction is x,the vertical direction is zand the out-of-plane direction is y.

we reconstruct the bubble flow separately for each of the 71 slices. However, this reconstruction procedure does not guarantee continuity of the velocity field in the y

(i.e., out-of-plane) direction. To mitigate this, we gen-erate multiple (60) candidate flow reconstruction within the bubble phase for each y-slice and then take an “av-erage” over these realizations, which smooths out strong small-scale fluctuations. The plot in Fig. 12 shows the ground truth and the reconstructed x-component of the vorticity field ωx = ∂y uz − ∂z uy , and we observe that large scale flow structures are well captured. As a quantitative assessment of the 3 d reconstruc-tion, in Fig. 13a,b we present the pdfs of the deriva-tives P (∂y uy ) and P (∂y uz ) for the reconstructed flow in the bubble phase and observe that they closely match the ground truth. Nevertheless, we emphasize that our naive 3 d reconstruction does not enforce point-wise in-compressibility, the distribution P (∇ · u)̸ = δ(∇ · u) (see Fig. 13c).  

> V. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

Our paper addresses the challenging problem of re-constructing the flow field within the bubble phase of a buoyancy-driven bubbly flow using diffusion models. While AI/ML techniques have been previously used to reconstruct missing regions in homogeneous turbu-lence [45], their application to multiphase flows has re-mained largely unexplored. Such a setting is particularly challenging because, in bubbly flows, the statistical prop-erties of the liquid and bubble phases are known to differ significantly [13, 14, 16, 41, 42]. Moreover, our study is also experimentally relevant, as direct flow measure-ments within the bubble phase are not feasible using op-tical diagnostics or direct in situ methods [10, 19, 23, 63]. Consequently, our proposed framework can be integrated with experiments to infer and analyze the flow dynamics inside bubbles. The training and test datasets are obtained from fully resolved three-dimensional (3 d) direct numerical simu-lations (DNS) of buoyancy-driven bubbly flows in the pseudo-turbulent regime (Ga ≈ 600) [13, 49]. Since train-ing the model directly on the complete 3 d fields is com-putationally prohibitive, we instead train the diffusion model on two-dimensional vertical slices, each selected so that it is intersected by at least one bubble. We then use the diffusion posterior sampling (DPS) frame-work to infer the flow inside the bubbles, conditioned on the known liquid-phase velocity field. We show that the model not only reproduces the large-scale flow pat-terns, but also captures the statistics of the velocity field, its gradients, and two-point correlations with high ac-curacy. Furthermore, the diffusion-based reconstruction substantially outperforms a smooth spline extrapolation approach [64]. Finally, we consider reconstruction of the three-dimensional flow within a bubble by stacking adjacent 10           

> FIG. 12. (Left) Ground-truth (a) and reconstructed (b) vorticity field ωxin the yz plane, shown together with the projected flow streamlines. (Right) Three-dimensional streamlines overlaid on the bubble surface (same bubble as in the top panel) for the ground truth (c) and the reconstructed flow (d).
> FIG. 13. Pdf of (a) the out-of-plane derivative of uy, (b) the out-of-plane-derivative of uz, and (c) the divergence of the velocity field. For (a) and (b) we have plotted the pdfs standardized with the ground truth standard deviation.

two-dimensional reconstructed slices. Because the reconstruction is statistical in nature, continuity of the velocity field across slices is not inherently guaranteed. To alleviate this, we generate multiple reconstructions (60) of the bubble-phase flow for each slice and then average them to obtain a smoother, more coherent flow field. The resulting 3D bubble-phase flow closely reproduces the ground truth. Furthermore, the statistics of the out-of-plane derivatives show good agreement with those obtained from the ground truth data. In conclusion, we demonstrate for the first time the feasi-bility of reconstructing the flow within the bubble phase using a guided diffusion model. As outlined previously, the methodology and findings are of direct experimental relevance. A natural extension of the present work would involve explicitly incorporating the bubble–liquid interfacial boundary conditions and the incompressibility constraint [65] into the diffusion model, with the aim of further enhancing the fidelity and accuracy of 3D flow reconstruction. 

> ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

H.N. thanks Vikash Pandey for many helpful discus-sions on the numerical methods. H.N. and P.P. ac-knowledge various discussions with Vikash Pandey and Dhrubaditya Mitra on bubbly flows. 

Funding: This work was supported by the European Re-search Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Hori-zon 2020 research and innovation program Smart-TURB (Grant Agreement No. 882340) and by the Italian Min-istry of University and Research (MUR) - Fondo Ital-iano per la Scienza (FIS2) - 2023 Call, Project DeepFL CUP : E53C24003760001, and FARE programme (No. R2045J8XAW). H.N. acknowledges support from the Smart-TURB (ERC) grant for his visit to the Univer-sity of Rome, Tor Vergata for this work. H.N. and P. P. acknowledge support from the Department of Atomic En-ergy (DAE), India under Project Identification No. RTI 4007, and DST (India) Projects No. MTR/2022/000867. Simulations for obtaining the DNS dataset were primar-ily performed on Kohinoor 5 HPC cluster (TIFR-H). The training for the diffusion model was performed on Hy-drosoft (University of Rome, Tor Vergata), with some additional testing on the Turing workstation (TIFR-H). 11 

[1] R. Clift, J. Grace, and M. Weber, Bubbles, Drops, and Particles , Dover Civil and Mechanical Engineering Series (Dover Publications, 2005). [2] S. Balachandar and J. K. Eaton, Turbulent dispersed multiphase flow, Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech. 42 , 111 (2010). [3] M. Lance and J. Bataille, Turbulence in the liquid phase of a uniform bubbly air–water flow, J. Fluid Mech. 222 ,9 (1991). [4] F. Risso, Agitation, mixing, and transfers induced by bubbles, Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech. 50 , 25 (2018). [5] V. Mathai, D. Lohse, and C. Sun, Bubbly and buoy-ant particle–laden turbulent flows, Annu. Rev. Condens. Matter Phys. 11 , 529 (2020). [6] D. Bhaga and M. E. Weber, Bubbles in viscous liquids: shapes, wakes and velocities, J. Fluid Mech. 105 , 61 (1981). [7] M. K. Tripathi, K. C. Sahu, and R. Govindarajan, Why a falling drop does not in general behave like a rising bubble, Scientific Reports 4, 4771 (2014). [8] M. K. Tripathi, K. C. Sahu, and R. Govindarajan, Dy-namics of an initially spherical bubble rising in quiescent liquid, Nat. Commun. 6 (2015). [9] S. Mendez-Diaz, J. C. Serrano-Garc´ia, R. Zenit, and J. A. Hern´ andez-Cordero, Power spectral distributions of pseudo-turbulent bubbly flows, Phys. Fluids 25 , 043303 (2013). [10] V. N. Prakash, J. Mart´inez Mercado, L. van Wijngaar-den, E. Mancilla, Y. Tagawa, D. Lohse, and C. Sun, En-ergy spectra in turbulent bubbly flows, J. Fluid Mech. 

791 , 174 (2016). [11] L. Scarbolo, F. Bianco, and A. Soldati, Turbulence mod-ification by dispersion of large deformable droplets, Eur. J. Mech. B Fluids 55 , 294 (2016), vortical Structures and Wall Turbulence. [12] S. Elghobashi, Direct numerical simulation of turbulent flows laden with droplets or bubbles, Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech. 51 , 217 (2019). [13] V. Pandey, R. Ramadugu, and P. Perlekar, Liquid veloc-ity fluctuations and energy spectra in three-dimensional buoyancy-driven bubbly flows, J. Fluid Mech. 884 , R6 (2020). [14] A. Innocenti, A. Jaccod, S. Popinet, and S. Chibbaro, Di-rect numerical simulation of bubble-induced turbulence, J. Fluid Mech. 918 , A23 (2021). [15] F. Mangani, G. Soligo, A. Roccon, and A. Soldati, Influ-ence of density and viscosity on deformation, breakage, and coalescence of bubbles in turbulence, Phys. Rev. Flu-ids 7, 053601 (2022). [16] V. Pandey, D. Mitra, and P. Perlekar, Kolmogorov turbu-lence coexists with pseudo-turbulence in buoyancy-driven bubbly flows, Phys. Rev. Lett. 131 , 114002 (2023). [17] G. Ramirez, A. Burlot, R. Zamansky, G. Bois, and F. Risso, Spectral analysis of dispersed multiphase flows in the presence of fluid interfaces, Int. J. Multiph. Flow 

177 , 104860 (2024). [18] M. Ravisankar and R. Zenit, Velocity fluctuations for bubbly flows at small re, J. Fluid Mech. 1001 , A34 (2024). [19] T. Ma, S. Tan, R. Ni, H. Hessenkemper, and A. D. Bragg, Kolmogorov scaling in bubble-induced turbulence, Phys. Rev. Lett. 134 , 244001 (2025). [20] F. Thiesset and J. Vah´ e, Scale-by-scale kinetic energy budgets in multiphase turbulence, J. Fluid Mech. 1025 ,A63 (2025). [21] H. Narula, V. Pandey, D. Mitra, and P. Perlekar, Scale-by-scale energy transfers in bubbly flows, J. Fluid Mech. 

1032 , A12 (2026). [22] F. Risso, Theoretical model for k−3 spectra in dispersed multiphase flows, Phys. Fluids 23 , 011701 (2011). [23] E. Alm´ eras, V. Mathai, D. Lohse, and C. Sun, Experi-mental investigation of the turbulence induced by a bub-ble swarm rising within incident turbulence, J. Fluid Mech. 825 , 1091 (2017). [24] Z. Amoura, C. Besnaci, F. Risso, and V. Roig, Velocity fluctuations generated by the flow through a random ar-ray of spheres: a model of bubble-induced agitation, J. Fluid Mech. Mechanics 823 , 592 (2017). [25] A. Esmaeeli and G. Tryggvason, Direct numerical simu-lations of bubbly flows part 2. moderate reynolds number arrays, J. Fluid Mech. 385 , 325 (1999). [26] J. Martinez Mercado, C. A. Palacios-Morales, and R. Zenit, Measurement of pseudoturbulence intensity in monodispersed bubbly liquids for 10 < Re < 50, Phys. Fluids 19 , 103302 (2007). [27] E. Almeras, V. Mathai, C. Sun, and D. Lohse, Mixing induced by a bubble swarm rising through incident tur-bulence, Int. J. Multiph. Flow 114 , 316 (2019). [28] H. Hessenkemper and T. Ziegenhein, Particle shadow ve-locimetry (psv) in bubbly flows, Int. J. Multiph. Flow 

106 , 268 (2018). [29] T. Ma, H. Hessenkemper, D. Lucas, and A. D. Bragg, An experimental study on the multiscale properties of turbulence in bubble-laden flows, J. Fluid Mech. 936 ,A42 (2022). [30] I. Poletaev, M. P. Tokarev, and K. S. Pervunin, Bubble patterns recognition using neural networks: Application to the analysis of a two-phase bubbly jet, Int. J. Multiph. Flow 126 , 103194 (2020). [31] T. Haas, C. Schubert, M. Eickhoff, and H. Pfeifer, Bubcnn: Bubble detection using faster rcnn and shape regression network, Chem. Eng. Sci. 216 , 115467 (2020). [32] R. F. Cerqueira and E. E. Paladino, Development of a deep learning-based image processing technique for bub-ble pattern recognition and shape reconstruction in dense bubbly flows, Chem. Eng. Sci. 230 , 116163 (2021). [33] Y. Kim and H. Park, Deep learning-based automated and universal bubble detection and mask extraction in com-plex two-phase flows, Sci. Rep. 11 , 8940 (2021). [34] Y. Cui, C. Li, W. Zhang, X. Ning, X. Shi, J. Gao, and X. Lan, A deep learning-based image processing method for bubble detection, segmentation, and shape recon-struction in high gas holdup sub-millimeter bubbly flows, Chem. Eng. J. 449 , 137859 (2022). [35] H. Hessenkemper, S. Starke, Y. Atassi, T. Ziegenhein, and D. Lucas, Bubble identification from images with machine learning methods, Int. J. Multiph. Flow 155 ,104169 (2022). [36] H. Wang, Y. Yang, G. Dou, J. Lou, X. Zhu, L. Song, and F. Dong, A 3d reconstruction method of bubble flow field based on multi-view images by bi-direction filtering maxi-mum likelihood expectation maximization algorithm, Int. J. Multiph. Flow 165 , 104480 (2023). 12 

[37] H. Hessenkemper, L. Wang, D. Lucas, S. Tan, R. Ni, and T. Ma, 3d detection and tracking of deformable bubbles in swarms with the aid of deep learning models, Int. J. Multiph. Flow 179 , 104932 (2024). [38] S. K¨ u¸ c¨ uk, C. D. Santina, and A. Laskari, Segmenting the complex and irregular in two-phase flows: A real-world empirical study with sam2 (2025), arXiv:2508.05227 [cs.CV]. [39] H. Zhai, Q. Zhou, and G. Hu, Predicting micro-bubble dynamics with semi-physics-informed deep learning, AIP Advances 12 , 035153 (2022). [40] G. Riboux, F. Risso, and D. Legendre, Experimental characterization of the agitation generated by bubbles rising at high reynolds number, J. Fluid Mech. 643 , 509 (2010). [41] J. Martinez Mercado, D. Chehata G´ omez, D. Van Gils, C. Sun, and D. Lohse, On bubble clustering and energy spectra in pseudo-turbulence, J. Fluid Mech. 650 , 287 (2010). [42] I. Roghair, J. M. Mercado, M. V. Sint Annaland, H. Kuipers, C. Sun, and D. Lohse, Energy spectra and bubble velocity distributions in pseudo-turbulence: Nu-merical simulations vs. experiments, Int. J. Multiph. Flow 37 , 1093 (2011). [43] T. Li, L. Biferale, F. Bonaccorso, M. A. ScarpoliniScar-polini, and M. Buzzicotti, Synthetic lagrangian turbu-lence by generative diffusion models, Nat. Mach. Intell. 

6, 393 (2024). [44] T. Li, S. Tommasi, M. Buzzicotti, F. Bonaccorso, and L. Biferale, Generative diffusion models for synthetic tra-jectories of heavy and light particles in turbulence, Int. J. Multiph. Flow 181 , 104980 (2024). [45] T. Li, A. S. Lanotte, M. Buzzicotti, F. Bonaccorso, and L. Biferale, Multi-scale reconstruction of turbulent rotat-ing flows with generative diffusion models, Atmosphere 

15 (2024). [46] T. Li, L. Biferale, F. Bonaccorso, M. Buzzicotti, and L. Centurioni, Stochastic reconstruction of gappy la-grangian turbulent signals by conditional diffusion mod-els, Communications Physics 8, 372 (2025). [47] A. Esmaeeli and G. Tryggvason, Direct numerical simula-tions of bubbly flows. part 1. low reynolds number arrays, J. Fluid Mech. 377 , 313 (1998). [48] B. Bunner and G. Tryggvason, Dynamics of homogeneous bubbly flows part 1. rise velocity and microstructure of the bubbles, J. Fluid Mech. 466 , 17 (2002). [49] V. Pandey, D. Mitra, and P. Perlekar, Turbulence mod-ulation in buoyancy-driven bubbly flows, J. Fluid Mech. 

932 , A19 (2022). [50] C. Canuto, M. Hussaini, A. Quarteroni, and T. Zang, 

Spectral methods in Fluid Dynamics (Spinger-Verlag, Berlin, 1988). [51] S. O. Unverdi and G. Tryggvason, A front-tracking method for viscous, incompressible, multi-fluid flows, J. Comput. Phys. 100 , 25 (1992). [52] W. Aniszewski, T. Arrufat, M. Crialesi-Esposito, S. Dabiri, D. Fuster, Y. Ling, J. Lu, L. Malan, S. Pal, R. Scardovelli, G. Tryggvason, P. Yecko, and S. Za-leski, Parallel, robust, interface simulator (paris), Com-put. Phys. Commun. 263 , 107849 (2021). [53] J. Sohl-Dickstein, E. Weiss, N. Maheswaranathan, and S. Ganguli, Deep unsupervised learning using nonequi-librium thermodynamics, in Proceedings of the 32nd In-ternational Conference on Machine Learning , Proceed-ings of Machine Learning Research, Vol. 37, edited by F. Bach and D. Blei (PMLR, Lille, France, 2015) pp. 2256–2265. [54] J. Ho, A. Jain, and P. Abbeel, Denoising diffusion prob-abilistic models, in Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems ,NIPS ’20 (Curran Associates Inc., Red Hook, NY, USA, 2020). [55] Supplementary material. [56] H. Ye, H. Lin, J. Han, M. Xu, S. Liu, Y. Liang, J. Ma, J. Zou, and S. Ermon, Tfg: Unified training-free guidance for diffusion models (2024), arXiv:2409.15761 [cs.LG]. [57] H. Chung, J. Kim, M. T. Mccann, M. L. Klasky, and J. C. Ye, Diffusion posterior sampling for general noisy inverse problems, in The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations (2023). [58] P. Du, M. H. Parikh, X. Fan, X.-Y. Liu, and J.-X. Wang, Conditional neural field latent diffusion model for gen-erating spatiotemporal turbulence, Nat. Commun. 15 ,10416 (2024). [59] Z. Li, W. Han, Y. Zhang, Q. Fu, J. Li, L. Qin, R. Dong, H. Sun, Y. Deng, and L. Yang, Learning spatiotemporal dynamics with a pretrained generative model, Nat. Mach. Intell. 6, 1566 (2024). [60] X. Gu, C. Du, T. Pang, C. Li, M. Lin, and Y. Wang, On memorization in diffusion models, Transactions on Machine Learning Research (2025). [61] We have confirmed that choosing NR = 100 instead does not affect the results. [62] P. Virtanen, R. Gommers, T. E. Oliphant, M. Haber-land, T. Reddy, D. Cournapeau, E. Burovski, P. Pe-terson, W. Weckesser, J. Bright, S. J. van der Walt, M. Brett, J. Wilson, K. J. Millman, N. Mayorov, A. R. J. Nelson, E. Jones, R. Kern, E. Larson, C. J. Carey, ˙I. Po-lat, Y. Feng, E. W. Moore, J. VanderPlas, D. Laxalde, J. Perktold, R. Cimrman, I. Henriksen, E. A. Quintero, C. R. Harris, A. M. Archibald, A. H. Ribeiro, F. Pe-dregosa, P. van Mulbregt, and SciPy 1.0 Contributors, SciPy 1.0: Fundamental Algorithms for Scientific Com-puting in Python, Nat. Methods 17 , 261 (2020). [63] R. Ni, Deformation and breakup of bubbles and drops in turbulence, Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech. 56 , 319 (2024). [64] SciPy Developers, CloughTocher2DInterpolator (scipy.interpolate), https://docs.scipy.org/doc/ scipy/reference/generated/scipy.interpolate. CloughTocher2DInterpolator.html (2026), accessed: 2026-04-04. [65] W. Genuist, ´Eric Savin, F. Gatti, and D. Clouteau, Divergence-free diffusion models for incompressible fluid flows (2026), arXiv:2601.19368 [physics.flu-dyn]. Supplementary Material for “Gappy Reconstruction of Bubbly Flows by Guided Diffusion Models” 

Hridey Narula, 1, ∗ Tianyi Li, 2 Michele Buzzicotti, 2 Luca Biferale, 2 and Prasad Perlekar 1, †  

> 1Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Gopanpally, Hyderabad 500046, India
> 2Department of Physics and INFN, University of Rome “Tor Vergata”, Via della Ricerca Scientifica 1, Rome, 00133, Italy
> (Dated: June 30, 2026)
> I. DIFFUSION MODEL DETAILS A. Variance Schedule

The variance schedule βt is the strength of the noise at step t and thus controls the amount of information lost at each step. The Langevin update from the noisy image at step t − 1 to t is: 

Xt = p1 − βtXt−1 + βtϵ, (1) where the noise ϵ is drawn from N (0, I). The variance schedule βt is taken to be a simple function of step t, two common choices are linear and tan-hyperbolic functions [1–5]. For the present work, we use a “bilinear” (piecewise linear) schedule defined as follows (with the step t ∈ [1 , T ]): 

βt =

(

βτ −1 + ( t − τ + 1) m2 t ≥ τβ1 + ( t − 1) m1 t < τ (2) where m1 and m2 are the slops for t < τ and t > τ respectively. We choose β1 = 10 −7, βτ = 10 −5 and βT = 10 −2

with T = 2000 and τ = 100. These parameters fix m1 ≈ 10 −7 and m2 ≈ 5.3 × 10 −6. The variance schedule is plotted in Fig. 1a. We have used this bilinear schedule because a linear schedule with slope m2 destroys the small-scale fluctuations too quickly. This is apparent in Fig. 1b where we have plotted the energy spectrum of the noiseless velocity field along with the energy spectrum of the noisy velocity field after a single step of Eq. (1) with noise strength m1 and m2.While in principle we can use a linear schedule with the smaller slope m1, this would require us to do a lot more noising diffusion steps making the training slower. Hence, we use a bilinear schedule with a smaller initial slope m1

and a larger slope m2 after the first 100 steps.  

> B. Model Architecture

We utilize a U-net architecture [6] for the diffusion model. The model architecture is schematically shown in Fig. 2. There are six stages in both the down-sampling (encoding) and up-sampling (decoding) stack. Both the stacks are connected by skip connections. The residual blocks are configured with channels [ C, C, 2C, 2C, 4C, 4C] where C = 256. Attention blocks [7] are applied at the last three stages, that is, at the resolution of 32 , 16 , and 8. The number of head channels used is 64. Further, the AdamW optimizer [8] is used in training. We fix the learning rate to 5 × 10 −5. Total iterations are 4 .9 × 10 5 with a batch size of 4 on eight NVIDIA A100 GPUs which took approximately 96 hours. The total number of training dataset samples was 16944 so that each epoch corresponds to 19644 /(4 × 8) ≈ 529 iterations. Finally, to generate new samples we use an exponential moving average (EMA) method with a decay rate 0 .9999. More details about the model architecture can be found in the previous works [2–5].   

> ∗hrideynarula@tifrh.res.in
> †perlekar@tifrh.res.in

2

FIG. 1. (a): Variance schedule βt as a function of the noising step t. The schedule is piecewise linear with slopes m1 (t < 100) and m2 (t ≥ 100). The inset is a zoom in near t = 100 to show the change in slope. (b): Energy spectrum of (i) the noiseless (clean) image (black solid line), and the noisy velocity field after a single update eq. (1) with noise strength (ii) m1 (blue circles) and (iii) m2 (red crosses). The spectrum is for a single randomly selected 2 d velocity slice from the training dataset. 

FIG. 2. Schematic for the U-Net architecture used in the present work. The input is the noisy image Xt at step t which passes first through the down-sampling (decoding) stack and then the up-sampling (encoding) stack, with the output being the slightly less noisy image Xt−1. Each down-sampling stage decreases the resolution by a factor of 2. The starting resolution is 256 Attention is applied at the last three stages with the resolution 32, 16 and 8 respectively. The down-sampling and up-sampling stacks are linked via skip connections (concatenation). 

II. INTERPOLATION DETAILS 

For 2 d interpolation we have used the scipy function griddata [9, 10]. Griddata is a general function to interpolate unstructured grid data. The function takes input the list of coordinates and the known function values at those points (for us, the liquid region) and can then interpolate the data on arbitrary points (for us, the bubble region). We use the ‘cubic’ mode which internally calls the CloughTocher2DInterpolator function from the scipy library. The resulting interpolant is a piecewise cubic and continuously differentiable function. For more details, we refer the reader to the webpage SciPy Developers [10] and references therein. Finally, we note that to explicitly take care of masked points near the boundary, we use periodic boundary conditions to tile the data before supplying it to the griddata function. For the one-dimensional cuts of two-dimensional slice, we also did a cubic spline interpolation, however, it was observed to be somewhat worse than the full two-dimensional interpolation and hence not shown. 3 

> III. RECONSTRUCTION OF EULERIAN TIME SERIES

Finally, we also show that the diffusion models can also be used for temporal reconstruction of velocity signals. As mentioned in the introduction, experimental techniques based on the material properties of fluids cannot obtain the flow velocity in both the phases accurately. Consider the Eulerian measurement of the velocity signal u(t) at some fixed location x0. When a bubble passes this point, the measurement records a spurious signal owing to the difference in the material properties (heat capacity, refractive index etc.) of the bubble and the liquid phases. In such cases, careful signal processing is required to remove/smoothen the corrupt part of the signal. This can be done, for example, either by application of a smoothening operator [11], thresholding either the amplitude or the derivative of the amplitude of the signal [12–14], pattern recognition [15], using phase-sensitive temperature anemometry [16–18] or by restricting measurements to the wake behind the bubble swarm only [19, 20]. Naturally, while such methods can accurately identify the part of the signal where bubbles interact with the probe and thus remove the ‘corrupt signal’, they miss out on the ‘true’ velocity signal u(t). We now show that diffusion models can be used to successfully reconstruct the Eulerian time signals u(x0, t ), during the window where the bubble is present at the location x0 given the signal is known at all other times. We use a fourth independent run with the same parameters (Ga = 600, At = 0 .04, Bo = 1 .75) as for runs R1-R3 but with 256 3

collocation points. The kinetic energy time series is shown in Fig. 3a. We use this to obtain 70 3 Eulerian time signals which are split into a 90 : 10 training/testing dataset. The probes are uniformly distributed in box, a subset of the same is shown in Fig. 3b. The signal length in the statistically steady state is about 186 τη with successive values separated by approximately τη /11 (where τη = pν/ε is the Kolmogorov time scale) so that the total points in the time series are 2048. We train the diffusion model on two channels: the indicator function ϕ and the vertical velocity uz . The model parameters are the same as used in the earlier study on gappy reconstruction of Lagrangian turbulent signals [5]. We train the model for 250 , 000 iterations using 8 GPUs with a per GPU batch size of 128, taking about 40 hours. We again first find the optimal guidance strength as shown in Fig. 4a. Since the normalized mean square error in the velocity component uz is larger in the bubble phase, we minimize it by choosing the optimal guidance strength to be 16. The plot of the pdf of the velocity signal in the bubble phase is shown in Fig. 4b, where we also plots the result obtained using a simple cubic spline interpolation from the scipy library [9]. Since the interpolation scheme cannot reliably work for the edge points, for calculations of all the statistics we drop 100 points from each end of the time-series. In Fig. 5a, we show a zoom-in of the time series of uz along with the reconstruction and cubic interpolation. Further. the temporal spectrum of the reconstructed signal as shown in Fig. 5b agrees quite well with the ground truth spectrum. Finally, we also show a longer time series of uz for both the ground truth and the reconstruction in Fig. 6. We thus conclude that diffusion models can also be used for reconstruction of gappy time signals, even when the statistics of the masked region (bubble) is different from the unmasked region (liquid).  

> FIG. 3. (a): Kinetic energy time series the DNS run used to obtain the Eulerian velocity time signals. Solid line indicates the region from which data is extracted. (b): An indicative selection of the Eulerian points where the velocity time signals are recorded.

4

FIG. 4. (a): Normalized mean square error Mz for the vertical velocity uz in the bubble and liquid phase as a function of the guidance strength ζ. (b): Normalized pdf of uz in the bubble phase for the ground truth, reconstruction and interpolation. Both are for 1 d temporal training. 

FIG. 5. (a): A zoom in of the uz (t) signal showing various possible reconstructions as well as filling by cubic interpolation. The shaded regions indicates the window where a bubble crosses the Eulerian point. (b): The energy spectrum in the frequency space E(ω). [1] J. Ho, A. Jain, and P. Abbeel, Denoising diffusion probabilistic models, in Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , NIPS ’20 (Curran Associates Inc., Red Hook, NY, USA, 2020). [2] T. Li, L. Biferale, F. Bonaccorso, M. A. ScarpoliniScarpolini, and M. Buzzicotti, Synthetic lagrangian turbulence by generative diffusion models, Nat. Mach. Intell. 6, 393 (2024). [3] T. Li, A. S. Lanotte, M. Buzzicotti, F. Bonaccorso, and L. Biferale, Multi-scale reconstruction of turbulent rotating flows with generative diffusion models, Atmosphere 15 (2024). [4] T. Li, S. Tommasi, M. Buzzicotti, F. Bonaccorso, and L. Biferale, Generative diffusion models for synthetic trajectories of heavy and light particles in turbulence, Int. J. Multiph. Flow 181 , 104980 (2024). [5] T. Li, L. Biferale, F. Bonaccorso, M. Buzzicotti, and L. Centurioni, Stochastic reconstruction of gappy lagrangian turbulent signals by conditional diffusion models, Communications Physics 8, 372 (2025). [6] O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox, U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image segmentation (2015), 5

FIG. 6. A longer time series for the ground truth as well as one possible reconstruction of the velocity signal uz . The shaded regions mark the windows where a bubble crosses the Eulerian point. arXiv:1505.04597 [cs.CV]. [7] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez, L. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, Attention is all you need (2023), arXiv:1706.03762 [cs.CL]. [8] I. Loshchilov and F. Hutter, Decoupled weight decay regularization (2019), arXiv:1711.05101 [cs.LG]. [9] P. Virtanen, R. Gommers, T. E. Oliphant, M. Haberland, T. Reddy, D. Cournapeau, E. Burovski, P. Peterson, W. Weckesser, J. Bright, S. J. van der Walt, M. Brett, J. Wilson, K. J. Millman, N. Mayorov, A. R. J. Nelson, E. Jones, R. Kern, E. Larson, C. J. Carey, ˙I. Polat, Y. Feng, E. W. Moore, J. VanderPlas, D. Laxalde, J. Perktold, R. Cimrman, I. Henriksen, E. A. Quintero, C. R. Harris, A. M. Archibald, A. H. Ribeiro, F. Pedregosa, P. van Mulbregt, and SciPy 1.0 Contributors, SciPy 1.0: Fundamental Algorithms for Scientific Computing in Python, Nat. Methods 17 , 261 (2020). [10] SciPy Developers, CloughTocher2DInterpolator (scipy.interpolate), https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/ generated/scipy.interpolate.CloughTocher2DInterpolator.html (2026), accessed: 2026-04-04. [11] M. Lance and J. Bataille, Turbulence in the liquid phase of a uniform bubbly air–water flow, J. Fluid Mech. 222 , 9 (1991). [12] R. Zenit, D. L. Koch, and A. S. Sangani, Measurements of the average properties of a suspension of bubbles rising in a vertical channel, J. Fluid Mech. 429 , 307 (2001). [13] J. Martinez Mercado, C. A. Palacios-Morales, and R. Zenit, Measurement of pseudoturbulence intensity in monodispersed bubbly liquids for 10 < Re < 50, Phys. Fluids 19 , 103302 (2007). [14] E. Alm´ eras, V. Mathai, D. Lohse, and C. Sun, Experimental investigation of the turbulence induced by a bubble swarm rising within incident turbulence, J. Fluid Mech. 825 , 1091 (2017). [15] J. Rensen, S. Luther, and D. Lohse, The effect of bubbles on developed turbulence, J. Fluid Mech. 538 , 153 (2005). [16] J. Martinez Mercado, D. Chehata G´ omez, D. Van Gils, C. Sun, and D. Lohse, On bubble clustering and energy spectra in pseudo-turbulence, J. Fluid Mech. 650 , 287 (2010). [17] S. Mendez-Diaz, J. C. Serrano-Garc´ia, R. Zenit, and J. A. Hern´ andez-Cordero, Power spectral distributions of pseudo-turbulent bubbly flows, Phys. Fluids 25 , 043303 (2013). [18] V. N. Prakash, J. Mart´inez Mercado, L. van Wijngaarden, E. Mancilla, Y. Tagawa, D. Lohse, and C. Sun, Energy spectra in turbulent bubbly flows, J. Fluid Mech. 791 , 174 (2016). [19] G. Riboux, F. Risso, and D. Legendre, Experimental characterization of the agitation generated by bubbles rising at high reynolds number, J. Fluid Mech. 643 , 509 (2010). [20] M. Ravisankar and R. Zenit, Velocity fluctuations for bubbly flows at small re, J. Fluid Mech. 1001 , A34 (2024).